Consolidation Initially, the surface that has undergone intergranular corrosion or intense weathering is consolidated to slow the phenomenon.
Old plaster removal After consolidation, older mortars that have failed or have caused cracks and other side-effects are removed by mechanical means. The plaster is not removed in parts of the surface, where they can cause further damage to marble.
Nail removal The corroded iron or bronze pins that were placed to withhold broken fragments during earlier conservation interventions are removed and replaced, where necessary, with titanium. The pin removal system has been developed by the marble technicians.
Rust removal Removing rust stains from corroded connectors is achieved by a neutralized thioglycolic acid solution.
Crack cleaning Cleaning of cracks, gaps and internal fracture surfaces aims at the removal of loose fragments, particles and microorganisms.
Dismantling and joining stone fragments For fragments that are collapsing or remain deformed on the surface, the possibility of detachment is examined on a case by case basis and according to position. Basic criteria are the preservation of the material and the non-alteration of the geometry of the surface during reassambly. Where greater support is required (for larger fragments) invisible titanium pins are selectively placed. Their sizing is calculated by a designated civil engineer. For smaller fragments a mechanically weaker cement with the addition of lime mortar is used.
Inlay of hinges The sealing of the joints is the final phase of the conservation works aiming  to prevent the entry of solid particles, ensure the runoff of rainwater and provide an aesthetic finish to the intervention.
Protection In order to protect the sculptures, they are transferred to the Acropolis museum. The surfaces of the monuments that remain exposed to air pollution have to be coated by a protective material that will inhibit the sulphation process and protect the surface as well as the conservation intervention materials meeting the requirements for reversibility and compatibility with the original marble.
After a long research project, conducted in the laboratory of Material Science and Engineering by Prof. T. Skoulikidis, a material based on n-semiconductors was advanced. These are metal oxides that acquire semiconducting properties when prepared electrolytically. Their action is based on the inhibition of sulphation. Among many such oxides tested, the aluminum oxide with a reversible polymer body proved to be the most effective. The composition of the material is a methyl methacrylate body in toluene 10% with the addition of electrolytically prepared aluminum oxide (Al2O3), which is the component with the properties of n-semiconductor. The n-semiconductor, beyond the protection of the marble, protects the body from UV radiation and aging. This material has been applied on a column of the Propylaea and an inscription on the plateau of the Acropolis.
Artificial patina To reduce the color contrast of the new marble complements, an artificial patina can be applied on selected occasions. The material consists of methyl methacrylate body with 10% in toluene, prepared electrolytically by adding iron oxide and mineral pigments.
Marble is a metamorphic rock consisting of carbonate minerals that recrystallize under the influence of heat, pressure and aqueous solutions, most commonly calcite (CaCO3) or dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) and has a crystalline texture of varying thickness. Marble is typically not foliated (layered), although there are exceptions.
In geology, the term marble refers to metamorphosed limestone, but its use in stonemasonry more broadly encompasses unmetamorphosed limestone. Marble is commonly used for sculpture and as a building material.
Marble is a rock resulting from metamorphism of sedimentary carbonate rocks, most commonly limestone or dolomite (rock). Metamorphism causes variable recrystallization of the original carbonate mineral grains. The resulting marble rock is typically composed of an interlocking mosaic of carbonate crystals. Primary sedimentary textures and structures of the original carbonate rock (protolith) have typically been modified or destroyed.
Pure white marble is the result of metamorphism of a very pure (silicate-poor) limestone or dolomite protolith. The characteristic swirls and veins of many colored marble varieties are usually due to various mineral impurities such as clay, silt, sand, iron oxides, or chert which were originally present as grains or layers in the limestone. Green coloration is often due to serpentine resulting from originally magnesium-rich limestone or dolomite with silica impurities. These various impurities have been mobilized and recrystallized by the intense pressure and heat of the metamorphism.
Degradation by acids Acids react with the calcium carbonate in marble, producing carbonic acid (which decomposes quickly to CO2 and H2O) and other soluble salts : CaCO3(s) + 2H+(aq) → Ca2+(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O (l)
Outdoor marble statues, gravestones, or other marble structures are damaged by acid rain whether by carbonation, sulfation or the formation of "black-crust" (accumulation of calcium sulphate, nitrates and carbon particles).[10] Vinegar and other acidic solutions should be avoided in the cleaning of marble products.
Crystallization Crystallization refers to a method of imparting a glossy more durable finish on to a marble floor (CaCO3). It involves polishing the surface with an acidic solution and a steel wool pad on a flooring machine. The chemical reaction below shows a typical process using magnesium fluorosilicate (MgSiF6) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) taking place.
CaCO3(s) + MgSiF6(l) + 2HCl (l) → MgCl2(s) + CaSiF6(s) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
The resulting calcium hexafluorosilicate (CaSiF6) is bonded to the surface of the marble. This is harder, more glossy and stain resistant compared to the original surface.
The other often used method of finishing marble is the use of polishing with oxalic acid (H2C2O4), an organic acid. The resulting reaction is as follows.
CaCO3(s) + H2C2O4(l) → CaC2O4(s) + CO2(g) + H2O(l) in this case the calcium oxalate (CaC2O4) formed in the reaction is washed away with the slurry leaving a surface that has not been chemically changed.
Microbial degradation The haloalkaliphilic methylotrophic bacterium Methylophaga murata was isolated from deteriorating marble in the Kremlin. Bacterial and fungal degradation was detected in four samples of marble from Milan Cathedral; black Cladosporium attacked dried acrylic resin[13] using melanin. Marble is a rock composed of calcium and magnesium carbonate, mostly white and pink.[1] Common marble varieties are granular limestone or dolomite. The hardness of marble is very high, because the internal structure of the rock is very uniform after long-term natural aging, and the internal stress disappears, so the marble will not be deformed due to temperature, and has strong wear resistance. It is a very popular building material.
The perfection of ancient building technique assured the strong resistance of the monuments to natural forces for a long time. Yet, in many cases, human activity upset the balance of the ancient construction, leaving the monument more susceptible to damage by the forces of nature. It is notable, however, that most of the damage that we are obliged to confront today does not originate in the action of the elements but in the interference of man. Moreover, the damage caused by rescue or restoration interventions of the recent past is extensive. The failure of these interventions lies mainly in the use of ordinary iron for joining fragments of architectural members or for increasing the durability of others.
Most of the damage suffered by the monuments and now being confronted in the framework of the contemporary interventions falls into the following categories:
Mechanical this includes damage wrought by earthquakes, explosions, bombardments, fires, freezing, and by the swelling of rusting iron reinforcements used in the interventions of the recent past.
Chemical this comprises forms of erosion suffered by the marble mainly as a result of acid rain. A serious problem connected with atmospheric pollution concerns the various accretions and deposits in the form of powder, carbon (black soot) and metal rust.
Biological these are forms of corrosion caused by lichens, moulds, bird-droppings, plant roots and their discharges.
A general principle of the works is to carry them out on the basis of decisions taken as objectively as possible, with transparency in all phases. These goals are achieved primarily by means of an interdisciplinary approach to the interventions during the phases of study and application, the publication of general and specialized studies for the restoration of the monuments prior to the actual interventions, their submission as top-level studies to a procedure of multiple assessment and then the final publication of the works.
The International Conferences of specialists held at regular intervals for exchange of opinion about the various proposals for interventions on the monuments and other special subjects, comprise a particularly important feature of the works. The interventions, in themselves, are conducted in the spirit of the Venice Charter (1964), the internationally accepted framework of principles codifying the requirements for the restoration of monuments. The following principles were formulated particularly for the monuments of ancient Greek architecture, and stem from the actual building system of the monuments of the classical period.
The principle of reversibility of the interventions. This means the possibility of returning the monument to its condition prior to the intervention.
Respect for the authentic material, retention of the structural autonomy of the architectural members and their original structural function.
Compliance with the above theoretical principles leads to specific choices in planning structural interventions on the Acropolis monuments, which can be summarized as follows:
Interventions are restricted to those parts of the monuments that have been damaged in earlier restorations or show structural deficiencies.
The materials used in restoration must be harmless and compatible with the authentic materials.
For joining fragments, the titanium rods required by the structural study, should be used as sparingly as possible and the holes for titanium reinforcements be as few as possible, so as to avoid damaging the ancient material.
To the extent possible, the existing ancient cuttings are used for joining the members. The basic criterion for calculating the reinforcements is that in a near-limit situation the reinforcements should fail rather than the ancient material.
In the joining of ancient fragments, only pieces that come from the same architectural member are joined together.
In restoration supplements of new marble are limited. The decision is always made on the basis of the structural and aesthetic autonomy of the member involved and the integrity of the area being restored
White marble has been prized for its use in sculptures since classical times. This preference has to do with its softness, which made it easier to carve, relative isotropy and homogeneity, and a relative resistance to shattering. Also, the low index of refraction of calcite allows light to penetrate 12.7 to 38 millimeters into the stone before being scattered out, resulting in the characteristic waxy look which brings a lifelike luster to marble sculptures of any kind, which is why many sculptors preferred and still prefer marble for sculpting.
Construction marble is a stone which is composed of calcite, dolomite or serpentine that is capable of taking a polish. More generally in construction, specifically the dimension stone trade, the term marble is used for any crystalline calcitic rock (and some non-calcitic rocks) useful as building stone. For example, Tennessee marble is really a dense granular fossiliferous gray to pink to maroon Ordovician limestone, that geologists call the Holston Formation.
Cleaning and Prevention The nature of marble is soft and porous, so it is easily stained by colored liquids and scratches easily. So daily maintenance and cleaning is particularly important.
Prevention Prevent sand and dust from contacting the marble surface. Avoid corroding marble surfaces with alcohol, color and acidic liquids.
Cleaning As a floor material, marble is the easiest to scratch. You can first use a vacuum cleaner to suck away the grit and dust on the marble floor, and then use a steam cleaner to remove other dirt.
A mild, pH-neutral, non-abrasive soap should be used for cleaning marble surfaces. Wipe with a soft foam cotton or rag.
Salt Crystallization Crystallization of salts within the pores of stones can generate sufficient stresses to cause the cracking of stone, often into powder fragments. This process is considered to be the major cause of stone deterioration in many parts of Western Europe [24-26]. Closely related to the crystallization of salt is damage caused by salt hydration and by differential thermal expansion of salts [14]. The resistance of stone to salt damage is dependent on the pore size distribution and decreases as the proportion of fine pores increases [11]. Crystallization damage caused by highly soluble salts, such as sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, is usually manifested by powdering and crumbling of the stone's surface [11]. Less soluble salts such as calcium sulfate form glassy, adherent films which cause spalling of a stone's surface [16].
A major source of salts in urban environments is the reaction between air pollutants and stone. For example, limestone can react with sulfur dioxide to ultimately produce calcium sulfate. Other sources of salts include ground water [27], airborne salts [27], sea spray [28], chemical cleaners [29], and deicing salts [30].
Aqueous Dissolution Carbonate sedimentary stones e.g., limestone and dolostone), carbonate-cemented sandstone, and marbles are types of stone that are susceptible to dissolution by water acidified with dissolved carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen oxides [31]. It has been reported [32, 51] that the rainwaters in many urban areas in the United States and Europe are sufficiently acidic to accelerate the weathering of exposed building stone. In areas where the rainwater is relatively free from pollutants, the dissolution of most common building stones is usually not a serious problem [30].
Frost Damage Certain stones which are exposed to freezing temperatures and wet conditions may undergo frost damage. The frost susceptibility of a stone is largely controlled by its porosity and pore size distribution [33,34]. Of stones with a given porosity, those with the smallest mean pore size will generally be the most susceptible to frost damage. Frost resistance also generally decreases with increased available porosity [15], i.e., pore volume which is accessible to water. The frost resistance of a stone is often assessed from its saturation coefficient,(2) with stones having saturation coefficients less than 0.8 being generally immune to frost damage [35].
Some European stone conservators [11,26] believe that in their countries frost damage is not an important process in the deterioration of stone. They regard frost damage as a secondary process, e.g., frost damage may be responsible for the final fragmentation of stone damaged by other processes, such as salt crystallization. However, because of the use of possibly more frost-susceptible stone and more severe climates, frost damage may be an important factor in the northern part of the United States [36,37].
Microbiological Growth The attack of stone by a variety of plants and animals has been reported [14] including roots of plants, ivy vines, microorganisms, boring animals, and birds. Of these, microorganisms appear to be the most destructive. Some types of bacteria, fungi, algae, and lichens produce acids and other chemicals which can attack carbonate and silicate minerals [14, 38]. It appears that under certain environmental conditions attack by microorganisms can be a serious problem [39-41]. However, it seems that many conservators feel that such instances are uncommon and that microorganism growth usually takes place in stone which had been partially deteriorated by other processes.
Human Contact Because of an increasing interest by the public in historic structures, the effects of human contact upon the condition of stone, as well as all other building materials, is of growing concern. For example, stone floors are gradually worn by foot traffic, stones are damaged by people either collecting souvenirs or poking into soft stone [28], and graffiti removal has become an important maintenance problem [42-48]. It is conceivable that human contact may become a major problem challenging the ingenuity of both stone conservators and maintenance specialists.
Original Construction The durability of stone structures also depends on factors encountered during their original construction including proper design, good construction practices, and proper selection of materials. Unfortunately, these are factors over which the preservation scientist has no control. However, the same mistakes should not be repeated in repairing or restoring historic structures. For example, normal steel and cast iron anchors, dowels, reinforcing rods, etc., were often used in the construction or repair of stone structures. Certain ferrous metals are susceptible to corrosion which can lead to the cracking and spalling of stonework [11]. Therefore, noncorroding material should be selected, e.g., epoxy-coated steel [44], certain types of stainless steel [45], or non-corroding non-ferrous alloys [11].
A large portion of stone durability problems are the consequence of using poor quality stone in the original construction. Riederer has suggested [46, 47] that air pollution is often blamed for stone deterioration in Germany which actually should be attributed to the natural weathering of poor quality stone. The use of poor quality sandstone in completing the Cathedral of Cologne [48,49] is presenting acute conservation problems. In another example, a poor quality dolomite limestone was used in the construction of the British Houses of Parliament [50] which eventually had to be replaced with a more durable limestone [15]. It is doubtful that a stone consolidant can make a poor quality stone durable and, as with the above example, stone replacement can be at times the most rational approach [52].
Primary Performance Requirements Primary performance requirements for stone consolidants are applicable to essentially all stone consolidants regardless of the specific use. These requirements are based on the premise that the main functions of such materials are to restore the cohesion, physical properties, and appearance of a deteriorated stone to near its original condition. Considerations are given in the requirements to the necessary levels of performance of consolidants for consolidation, durability of the consolidated stone, depth of penetration, effect on stone porosity and moisture transfer, computability of consolidant with stone, and effect on appearance. These performance considerations could become the basis for stone consolidant specifications.
Consolidating Value The most important function of a stone consolidant is to re-establish cohesion of the particles of deteriorated stone [1-4]. Methods which have been used to obtain a qualitative assessment of the consolidating value of stone consolidants include the measurement of the tensile strength of treated unweathered stone [25, 53], measurement of surface hardness of treated weathered stone [54,55], and the abrasion resistance of treated unweathered stone [56]. A more quantitative test needs to be developed, which incorporates the testing of standard deteriorated stone. A standard deteriorated stone may merely be finely crushed stone, which is then treated with consolidants and its tensile strength measured. The tensile strength of the treated crushed stone could be compared to the strength of the original stone.
Only one recommendation was found in this review for what constitutes an acceptable performance level for consolidation value. Gauri has recommended [54] that the compressive strength of a treated weathered stone should be at least 10 percent above that of the untreated and unweathered stone. However, increasing the strength of weathered stone substantially above that of unweathered stone may accelerate the decay of the unweathered stone [68], unless the complete structure is treated with the consolidant.
Durability of Consolidated Stone The consolidated stone should generally be as durable as the unweathered stone. If the consolidated stone is substantially less durable than unweathered stone, it may be advantageous to replace the deteriorated stone with new stone. In addition, treated stone should weather (in terms of appearance) at nearly the same rate as the original stone, to retain, as closely as possible, the authentic appearance of the stone. Torraca [l] has suggested that it is not justified to demand that a consolidant should protect a stone forever from any environment.
Durability of a consolidated stone is dependent on several factors, including the durability of the consolidant, compatibility of the consolidant with the weathered stone, properties of the consolidated stone, and the environment. The complex interaction among these factors makes the development of appropriate accelerated durability tests difficult. A methodology is given in ASTM E-632 [69] which can be useful in the design and development of rational accelerated durability tests for consolidants.
Depth of Penetration Past experience with stone consolidants has shown that their ability to penetrate weathered stone is one of the main factors controlling their performance [3, 16, 25, 57-60]. Superficially-penetrating consolidants tend to fill the pores of stone surface layers, thereby reducing the permeability. This may result in the accumulation of moisture and salts behind the treated layers [58, 61]. Furthermore, interfacial delamination often occurs because of a marked difference in the thermal properties of the treated and untreated stone [10, 11, 58]. Price has suggested [58] that a good consolidant should be able to penetrate a weathered porous stone to a depth of at least 25 mm. This should result in a gradual transition in the thermal and mechanical properties from the exterior treated surface to the inner layer of untreated stone. A slightly different requirement has been given by Torraca [1]. He proposed that a stone consolidant should penetrate a weathered stone to a depth that all incoherent material is solidified and attached to the sound core of the stone. Properties of a stone consolidant which affects its ability to penetrate a specific stone at a given temperature include its viscosity [57, 59, 61], surface tension [59], the rate at which gel or precipitate is formed [16], method and conditions of application [2, 63], and rate of evaporation of any solvent [66]. Tammes and Vos [67] developed the following relation for the horizontal transport of liquid through porous materials;
Stone Porosity As previously mentioned, the porosity and pore size distribution of a stone can have a major effect on its durability. For example, the resistance of a given type of stone to frost damage and to salt damage decreases as the proportion of fine pores increase [11, 33]. Therefore, a stone consolidant which reduces the size of large pores but does not close them may be harmful. For example, Dukes [2] found that silicone ester consolidants decreased the frost resistance of portland stone used as gravestones by increasing the number of small pores.
A method which can be used to determine the effects of a stone consolidant on pore size distribution was described by Clifton et al. [70]. In their work, the pore size distributions of both impregnated and unimpregnated hardened cement pastes were measured using a mercury porosimeter. Both pressurization and depressurization studies were performed. Pressurization results give an indication of the total open porosity and pore size distribution. Information on the shape and continuity of pores is obtained by depressurization work. Pressurization studies on stone have been performed by Biscontin and Pavan [71] and by Alessandrini et al. [72].
Moisture Transfer Many stone preservatives and stone consolidants have performed poorly because they form a surface film which impedes liquid water migration through the treated stone, but allows water vapor to pass. This can lead to a situation where water evaporates behind the treated stone leaving deposits of salts [59, 61]. Because water vapor can pass in and out of the stone, the deposited salts may rehydrate and possibly be converted into different crystal forms. Further, larger crystals may grow through the dissolution of small crystals and reprecipitation on larger crystals. These processes may result in the disruption of the microstructure of the stone and breakdown of cohesion between stone particles [14]. Further, impeding the passage of water vapor may increase the susceptibility of a stone to frost damage and to thermal shock.
If a material produces a film which prevents the passage of both water and water vapor, large amounts of moisture could accumulate in a structure. In addition to decreasing the resistance of the stone to frost damage, excess moisture in a structure could cause the rotting of wood, corrosion of metals, and degradation of plaster and roofing materials.
Munnikendam has suggested [73] that a consolidant should be hydrophilic to allow moisture to pass through the treated stone. In addition, he suggested that the water vapor transmission of treated stone should not be decreased by more than 30 percent compared to untreated stone.
The water absorption and water vapor permeability of stone, untreated and treated, can be measured by following the procedures of ASTM C97 [74] and ASTM C355 [75], respectively.
Compatibility of Consolidant with Stone Experiences with stone consolidants have demonstrated [16, 61] that they should be compatible with stone to form a durable composite. Specific compatibility requirements should include the following:
Cured consolidants should have thermal-dimensional properties similar to those of sound stone [16, 73]. Otherwise, delamination of the consolidated stone from the untreated stone could occur [76], especially if the stone is subjected to thermal shock. In addition, the cured consolidant should not become brittle [16, 76, 77].
The consolidant should not severely disrupt the microstructure of the stone [16]. For example, if the crystals formed from the precipitation of an inorganic consolidant exhibit crystal growth sufficient tensile stresses may be produced to cause the development of microcracks, and ultimately macrocracks in the matrix. Further, Marsh [50] pointed out that replacing a constituent of stone with another of a larger molecular volume can cause dilation stresses leading to cracking. The effects of a few inorganic consolidants, e.g., hydrofluoric acid, depend on their reacting with the constituents of the stone to form insoluble products. Many conservators [5, 16, 76, 78] are opposed to the use of such materials because the reaction products usually fill the voids and pores, thereby sealing the surfaces.
Consolidants should not form by-products which can be harmful to the stone. Many of the inorganic consolidants are precipitated as a result of the reaction between two dissolved salts [1, 16, 50]. In addition to the precipitate, at least one soluble salt is formed, much of which is deposited in the stone as the water evaporates. These soluble salts can damage the stone through recrystallization processes and/or produce unsightly efflorescence on the treated stone's surface.
Effect on Appearance Ideally the application of a stone consolidant would not cause any change in the appearance of a stone. Most inorganic consolidants, however, produce a white deposit within the voids and pores of a stone, the color of which may not match the color of the stone. While organic consolidants usually form transparent polymers when cured, they can change the reflective properties of a stone [79]. Further, the optical properties of organic polymers may gradually change because of their degradation by photochemical processes, oxidation by oxygen and ozone, and attack by air pollutants.
The permissible extent of change in appearance accompanying the use of a consolidant is probably best dealt with by the conservator responsible for the preservation of a structure. This is because the extent of the change in appearance is partially controlled by the interactions between a consolidant and a specific stone, and also by the environment. Furthermore, the location of the deteriorated stone within a structure, the extent of stone deterioration, the nature of the change in appearance, and the importance of a structure should be considered in deciding what constitutes a permissible change in appearance.
In laboratory evaluations of the performance of stone consolidants, the change in appearance of a standard stone specimen should be quantitatively determined. The preparation of test specimens, exposure condition and evaluation methods should be standardized. Then the results of such a standard test could form the basis for selecting promising materials for specific applications. Gauri et al. [54] developed a laboratory performance test for organic consolidants in which the absorbency of a polymer at 254 mu was compared to that of bisphenol-A epoxy resin.
Several methods can be used in the laboratory and in the field to measure the change in appearance of stone caused by consolidating materials. In a laboratory evaluation of preservatives, Sleater [12] instrumentally compared the color and gloss of treated and untreated stone specimens following the methods given in ASTM D 2244 [80] and ASTM D 523 [81]. He also recommended that a visual estimation of color differences be made. The Munsell color system [82] can be used in both the laboratory and field to determine color changes. Winkler [83] has developed a promising method to measure rapidly the reflectance of stone using a photographic light meter and reflex camera.
Inorganic Materials Inorganic stone consolidants were extensively used during the l9th century and still are occasionally being used. Most inorganic consolidants produce a white insoluble phase within the voids and pores of a stone, either by precipitation of a salt or by chemical reactions with the stone. It has been rationalized that the development of a new phase similar in composition to the matrix of a stone will bind together the particles of deteriorated stone. For example, consolidants which result in the formation of a silica phase should be used to consolidate sandstone, and calcium carbonate or barium carbonate used to consolidate calcareous stones such as limestone. In practice, however, little concern is given to chemical compatibility between the consolidants and stone.
Little success has been achieved in consolidating stone with inorganic materials, and in some cases their use has greatly accelerated stone decay [16, 50, 78]. Some of the reasons given for the poor performance of inorganic consolidants are their tendencies to produce shallow and hard crusts [16, 60, 76], the formation of soluble salts as reaction by-products [1, 16, 60, 86, 87], growth of precipitated crystals [50], and the questionable ability of some of them to bind stone particles together [6, 85]. Of these, the most difficult problem to overcome is the formation of shallow hard surface layers by inorganic consolidants because of their poor penetration abilities. Precipitation processes are often so rapid that precipitates are formed before the inorganic chemicals can appreciably penetrate the stone. A method, referred to as precipitation from homogeneous solutions, has been developed to obtain deeper penetration of stone by some inorganic consolidants. This method is discussed in Section 4.1.2.
Siliceous Consolidants Siliceous consolidants are materials which have been used to consolidate sandstone and limestone through the formation of silica or insoluble silicates.
Alkali Silicates Both nonstoichiometric dispersions of silica in sodium hydroxide and soluble alkali silicates have been used to conserve and consolidate stone. When dispersions of silica in sodium hydroxide solutions are applied to a stone. silica is deposited [16, 88]. If sodium hydroxide is not removed by washing, it can react with carbon dioxide or sulfur trioxide to form sodium carbonate or sodium sulfate, respectively. These salts can cause unsightly efflorescence and salt crystallization damage. In addition, it seems that sodium hydroxide can react with the constituent of some stones, thereby accelerating stone deterioration [16].
Silica can be precipitated by the reaction between sodium silicate, as well as potassium silicate, and acids such as hydrochloric acid and arsenic acid [16, 88, 89]. However, these reactions result in the formation of soluble salts such as sodium chloride and sodium arsenate. If the sodium silicate-arsenic acid mixture is used to consolidate limestone, crystalline calcium arsenate can be produced by a reaction between calcium carbonate and arsenic acid. The crystalline calcium arsenate appears to damage limestone by anisotropic crystal growth [16].
Insoluble silicates have been precipitated in stone by alternate treatments of sodium silicate and a variety of salts such as calcium chloride [16, 85, 88, 91] and zinc carbonate [90]. Colloidal silicates are first produced which eventually become crystalline [16], while soluble salts are produced as by-products. Impervious surface layers are also produced which trap water beneath [92]. Apparently, the silicates precipitate relatively rapidly so that they are deposited near the surfaces of the treated stones.
Even with all the problems associated with the use of alkali silicates, they are still occasionally being applied [5]. Recently, the successful use of soluble silicates was reported [93]. However, the overwhelming evidence clearly indicates that alkali silicates should not be used for stone consolidating purposes.Silicofluorides Both hydrofluosilicic acid and soluble silicofluorides have been used to preserve and consolidate stone. Hydrofluorosilic acid should not be used on limestone as it reacts vigorously with calcium carbonate to form crystalline calcium silicofluoride, carbonic acid, and carbonate salts [91]. The reaction occurs upon contact of the acid with the limestone producing a shallow crust with little consolidating value. Hydrofluorosilic acid reacts more slowly with siliceous-based sandstones to form a cementitious material, but again only the surface is hardened. Hydrofluorosilic acid has a tendency to discolor both limestones and sandstones, especially if they contain iron [16].
Many soluble types of silicofluorides, such as magnesium, zinc, and aluminum, have been applied to limestone. Resulting products are silica, insoluble fluoride salts and carbon dioxide, which are formed near the surface of the limestone. Therefore, only the surface is hardened, which eventually exfoliates [52, 76, 94]. Soluble silicofluorides also react with calcareous sandstones and again only a hardened surface is obtained. Further, soluble salts are formed when both limestone and calcerous sandstone are treated with silicofluorides [60]. These soluble salts have caused damage through salt recrystallization processes [86]. Penkala [95] recently carried out a systematic study of several stone treatments and also found that fluorosilicates were not effective consolidators.
Calcium Hydroxide Aqueous solutions of calcium hydroxide (its saturated solution is often called limewater) have been used for many centuries to protect and consolidate limestone [96]. Calcium hydroxide itself does not appear to consolidate stone, but when in solution or a wet state it reacts with atmospheric carbon dioxide to form insoluble calcium carbonate, which may bind particles of calcareous stones together. The solubility of calcium hydroxide is only about 1 gram per liter at room temperature [97], therefore repeated applications are necessary to produce sufficient calcium carbonate to consolidate stone. Furthermore, unless very dilute solutions are used, only the calcium hydroxide deposited near the surface of a stone is carbonated. This happens if the dense calcium carbonate being formed at the surface fills the pores and voids in the stone. This severely impedes the migration of carbon dioxide through the treated surface to the interior of the stone.
The newly produced calcium carbonate is susceptible to the same deterioration processes as the calcareous stone. For example, it can react with sulfur trioxide to form calcium sulfate, which is relatively soluble compared to calcium carbonate. Therefore, the treated stone may not be protected against further weathering. However, the treated stone may eventually gain the authentic appearance of the weathering stone.
Conflicting opinions have been given of the effectiveness of the calcium hydroxide process. Some conservators [8, 16] have felt that while treatment with calcium hydroxide causes no harm, little permanent consolidation is obtained, while others [50, 96, 98, 99] have recommended the use of lime water to protect limestone from weathering and to consolidate them. The effectiveness of freshly prepared slaked lime (calcium oxide mixed with water) in consolidating statues at the Wells Cathedral in England is being investigated by Professor Baker [100]. He is applying 38 mm thick layers of slaked lime to statues, which are being removed several weeks later. Some consolidation appears to be occurring.
Apparently, repeated limewater and slaked lime treatment can gradually consolidate limestone, but such processes are only economically feasible for small objects.
Strontium and Barium Hydroxides Similar to calcium hydroxide, strontium and barium hydroxides will react with carbon dioxide to form insoluble carbonates. Again, only the hydroxide near surface of a stone is usually carbonated. However, unlike calcium sulfate, strontium and barium sulfates are insoluble and thus the application of strontium and barium hydroxides may reduce the weathering of stone exposed to polluted environments.
The early work on the use of barium hydroxide to conserve stone was performed by Church [101-103]. Initially, excellent results were obtained. However, only a surface hardening was being obtained and eventually the barium carbonate or barium sulfate layer exfoliated [16, 50, 76, 92]. The exfoliation problem has been attributed not only to the formation of a dense impervious surface layer, but also to anisotropic crystal growth of barium carbonate and barium sulfate [16, 50].
Lewin [104] and Sayre [105] have developed methods intended to precipitate barium carbonate and barium sulfate deeply within a stone. These methods are based on a process known as precipitation from homogeneous solution [106]. In this process the material to be precipitated and the precipitating chemicals are present in the same solution. For example, barium carbonate is precipitated from an aqueous solution of barium hydroxide and urea [104, 108]. The urea slowly undergoes hydrolysis producing ammonia and carbon dioxide. The liberated ammonia and carbon dioxide dissolves in the water forming ammonium carbonate which raises the pH of the solution. When a certain pH is reached, barium hydroxide reacts with the carbonate ion and barium carbonate is precipitated. The reaction rate can be controlled so the barium carbonate precipitate forms days after a stone is treated. The slow formation of barium carbonate is reported to give a crystalline solid solution with the calcite crystals of calcareous stone. Barium sulfate can be precipitated in a stone by an analogous method. An aqueous solution of a barium monoester of sulfuric acid hydrolyzes slowly when a base is added, releasing barium and sulfate ions [106].
The precipitation of barium carbonate and barium sulfate by homogeneous solution precipitation methods is clearly a promising approach. To date, however, only experimental testing has been carried out and little is known concerning the long-term consolidating effectiveness of this approach. Warnes [16] and Marsh [50] have both suggested that crystalline inorganic precipitates, such as barium carbonate and sulfate, do not have long term consolidating value. Also the precipitates of barium carbonate and barium sulfate have a larger molecular volume than calcite and appear to exhibit anisotropic crystal growth [16, 50]. It should not be assumed that deteriorated stone will have sufficient empty volume to accommodate these precipitates. Therefore, until more is known of the long-term effects of barium carbonate and barium sulfate on the durability of stone, they should be regarded as experimental materials which should not be applied to important historic structures.
Alkoxysilanes are regarded by many stone conservators [8, 25, 59, 99, 109-114] as being among the most promising stone consolidating materials for siliceous sandstones. The feasibility of using alkoxysilanes to consolidate calcareous stone is also being studied [115-116]. The main reasons that alkoxysilanes are being highly regarded are their abilities to penetrate deeply into porous stone and the fact that their polymerization can be delayed until deep penetration has been achieved [25, 58, 99, 109, 110, 112]. In addition, they polymerize to produce materials similar to the binder in siliceous sandstone.
The use of alkoxysilanes for consolidating stone is not a recent development. For example, Laurie [117] received a patent in 1925 for producing such a material to be used for stone consolidation. Other early researchers on the use of alkoxysilanes to consolidate stone are Cogan and Setterstrom [118-119]. Alkoxysilanes have been commonly used since around 1960 in Germany [5]. Recently, a promising alkoxysilane consolidating material was developed at the UK Building Research Establishment, called "Brethane" [112].
Price [58] and Weber [111] have observed that alkoxysilanes can penetrate porous stones to a depth of between 20 to 25 mm. The newly developed Brethane has been reported [112] to penetrate as deeply as 50 mm. No noticeable polymerization occurs with Brethane for at least 3 hours after it is mixed with a solvent and catalysis [58, 109]. The large sizes of unpolymerized alkoxysilane molecules, no doubt, will prevent them from entering the smaller pores of a stone.
Marschner reported [120] that alkoxysilanes improved the resistance of sandstone to sodium sulfate crystallization. However, she also observed that their performance varied from sandstone to sandstone and also depended on the compatibility between the solvent and the specific stone being treated. Similar findings were reported by Moncrieff [115] who studied the consolidation of marble. Snethlage and Klemm [121] observed in a scanning electron microscope analysis of impregnated sandstone that a polymerized alkoxysilane appeared to fill the space between sandstone grains and form a continuous coating. However, polymerized alkoxysilanes are reported [25, 58,110, 115] to have little effect on moisture passage in stone and the frost resistance of stone. Some slight changes in the color of treated stone have been observed [122, 123]. For example, statutes on the Wells Cathedral have become more dull grey following treatment with an alkoxysilane [123]. Further, a treated stone panel on the Cathedral has acquired a slightly more orange tone than adjacent untreated panels.
Once a section of stone is treated with alkoxysilane, it will probably weather differently than the untreated stone. Thus, unless most of the visible parts of a structure are similarly treated, the contrast between the treated and untreated stone could become very noticeable.
Strength improvements of around 20 percent have been reported [25, 110] when sandstone specimens were impregnated with alkoxysilanes. The ability of alkoxysilanes to consolidate deteriorated stone in the field, however, has not been unequivocally demonstrated. Further, it appears that the performance of alkoxysilanes varies from stone to stone.
Even if alkoxysilanes are found to be effective consolidants, their high cost [28, 112] will probably limit their use to statues and smaller-sized stone objects.
Synthetic Organic Polymer Systems Two general types of synthetic organic polymer systems are used to consolidate stone. In the first, monomeric organic molecules are first polymerized, dissolved in appropriate solvents, and then applied to stone. They are deposited within the voids and pores of the stone as the solvent evaporates. The second type are monomeric organic molecules, either pure or dissolved in a solvent, which are polymerized within the voids and pores of a stone. Viscous monomers are diluted with solvents so that deep penetration can be achieved [57]. Solvents which evaporate rapidly (most common organic solvents), however, have been found to draw organic consolidants back to the surface of a stone, resulting in the formation of impervious hard surface crusts [57, 61]. Munnikendam [59] has recommended that organic consolidants should be selected whose solidification does not depend on solvent evaporation.
Both thermoplastics and thermosets have been used to consolidate stone. A thermoplastic is a material which can be reformed by the application of heat without significant changes in properties. Examples of thermoplastics are poly(vinylchloride), poly(ethylene), nylon, poly(styrene) and poly(methylmethacrylate). A thermoset is a material which is formed into a permanent shape by the application of heat, and once formed, cannot be remelted or reformed. Polyester, epoxy, and polyurethane are examples of thermosets. Methylmethacrylate can be converted into a thermoset by copolymerization with a three dimensional cross-linking material.
The use of synthetic organic polymer systems to consolidate stone is a recent development, dating back to around the early 1960's. Therefore, little is known regarding the long-term performance of these materials. Some organic consolidants have been found to improve significantly the mechanical properties of deteriorated stone. Many organic polymers are susceptible to degradation by oxygen and ultraviolet radiation, but this would only affect the materials on the surface of a treated stone [1]. Riederer reported [5] that the surfaces of some stone structures in Germany which had been consolidated with organic polymers in 1965 had exhibited deep channel erosion by 1975. Apparently, water gradually eroded the consolidated surface and once the surface was pierced, erosion proceeded rapidly into the untreated stone.
Acrylic Polymers Methylmethacrylate and to a lesser extent butylmethacrylate have been used to consolidate concrete [64, 65] and stone [58]. These monomers can be applied solvent-free to porous solids and can be polymerized in situ. An excellent source for information on their polymerization as well as on polymer-impregnated concrete is the report by Kukacha et al [64]. Methylmethacrylate has been polymerized into poly(methylmethacrylate) by heating with an initiator, by gamma radiation, and at ambient temperature by combination of promoters and initiators [64, 124]. For thermal polymerization, the chemical initiator (catalyst) azobis(isobutyronitrile) has been found to be effective [125]. Heating blankets could be used to thermally polymerize methylmethacrylate or other monomerics applied to a stone structure. Polymerization by radiation is only feasible if carried out in special chambers because of the radiation hazards. Chemical promoters convert initiators into free radicals at ambient temperatures. Then these free radicals induce the polymerization of methylmethacrylate. Munnikendam [61] used N,N-dimethyl-P-toluidine to decompose benzoyl peroxide into free radicals. He found, however, that oxygen inhibited the subsequent polymerization reaction of methylmethacrylate. Better success probably could be achieved by using azobis(isobutyronitrile) as the initiator [125].
Where deep or complete impregnation and complete polymerization was achieved, methylmethacrylate and other acrylates have been shown to improve substantially the mechanical properties and durability of porous materials such as concrete [64]. However, incomplete impregnation, with acrylates may result in the formation of a distinct interface between treated and untreated stone [120].
Polymer-impregnated concretes based on acrylics are classified as brittle materials based on their stress-strain curves [64, 125, 126]. Stone consolidated with methylmethacrylate and other acrylics can be expected to exhibit a similar brittle behavior.
Methylmethacrylate, no doubt, can harden the surface of a stone and effectively consolidate the stone if both deep penetration and complete polymerization are achieved. Similar to the case with alkoxysilanes, however, stone impregnated with methylmethacrylate will probably weather differently than untreated stone. In addition, erosion through the treated stone [5] could contribute to the development of an unsightly appearance.
Acrylic Copolymers Copolymers are produced by the joining of two or more different monomers in a polymer chain [127]. A commercially available acrylic copolymer used for stone consolidation is copolymerized from ethylmethacrylate and methylacrylate [38, 121]. Other acrylic copolymers which have been studied for stone conservation include copolymers between acrylics and fluorocarbons [128, 129] and between acrylics and silicon esters [59, 121].
The acrylic copolymers are dissolved in organic solvents then applied to stone. As discussed earlier, unless very dilute solutions are applied to a stone solvent evaporation will tend to draw the acrylic copolymers back to the surface. Then, even if diluted to the lowest concentration that will give some consolidation, their solutions still may have viscosities which impede their penetration into stone.
Vinyl Polymers Several vinyl polymers have been studied or used for conservation and consolidating of stone including poly(vinylchloride) [54, 130], chlorinated-poly(vinylchloride) [130], and poly(vinylacetate) [38, 54, 130, 131]. These polymers are dissolved in organic solvents and then applied to stone. Photochemical processes could release chlorine from the chloride polymers, which could damage stone [130]. Poly(vinylacetate) has been found to produce a glossy stone surface [130]. If not carefully applied and if not sufficiently diluted, use of the vinyl polymers undoubtedly will result in the formation of impervious layers which entrap moisture and salts underneath [38].
Epoxies The feasibility of using epoxies to consolidate stone is addressed by first briefly discussing their chemistry and then applications.
An epoxy consists of an epoxy resin and a curing agent which is actually a polymerization agent. Cure, i.e., polymerization, of an epoxy is initiated by mixing the epoxy resin with the curing agent. The epoxy resin is then converted into a hard thermosetting cross-linked polymer. The most commonly used epoxy resins are monomers of diphenylolpropane, called bisphenol A, and epichlorohydrin. Resins produced from these reactants are liquids, but are too viscous to penetrate stone deeply. Therefore, they are diluted with organic solvents. These epoxy resins are often cured using an amine curing agent. Their cure time can be adjusted by selecting a slowly or rapidly reacting curing agent and by controlling the curing temperature. The resulting cross-linked polymers have excellent adhesion to stone and concrete, and excellent chemical resistances. Two recommended sources for information on epoxies, such as their chemistry, curing, and applications are reference Nos. 132 and 133.
Gauri [134-135] developed a method to achieve deep penetration with viscous epoxy resins and at the same time avoid the formation of a sharp interface between the consolidated and untreated stone. First, specimens are soaked in acetone, then in a dilute solution of epoxy resin in acetone, followed by soaking in increasingly concentrated solutions. This method is feasible for small stone objects such as tombstones and statues, but would be too time consuming and expensive for stone structures.
Less viscous epoxy resins are available including diepoxybutane diglycidyl ether and butanediol diglycidyl ether [58]. Munnikendam [61] cured butanediol diglycidyl ether with alicyclic polyamines such as menthane diamine. However, the viscosity was still too high and he diluted the mixture with tetraethoxysilane and tetramethoxysilane. A complex reaction took place involving the epoxy resin, curing agent and solvent to produce a tough, glassy material. A white efflorescence also developed due to a reaction between the polyamine and carbon dioxide to Form amine-carbonates [61, 137]. Formation of the aminecarbonates can be avoided by preventing carbon dioxide from coming in contact with the solution. Gauri [128, 136] observed that when low viscosity aliphatic epoxy resins were applied to calcareous stones, the reaction rates between the stones and carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide were increased compared to the rates with untreated stones. He suggested that the increased reactivity could be caused by absorption of the gases by the epoxy polymer or by the polymer acting as a semipermeable film to the gases. In contrast, bisphenol A-based epoxy polymers were found to protect the stone from both carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide.
The use of epoxies has been suggested for consolidating limestone [14, 128, 129], marble [134-139], and sandstone [61, 121] as well as for re-adhering large stone fragments to mass stone [1]. Moncrieff and Hempel [138] found that certain epoxies could encapsulate salts in marble, thereby preventing them from re-crystallizing. A large restoration project using epoxies for masonry consolidation is that of the Santa Maria Maggiore Church in Venice [140].
Similar to poly(methylmethacrylate), epoxies have produced brittle epoxy-impregnated concretes with high mechanical properties [65, 141,142]. The long-term effect on incorporating a brittle material in stone is not known, but could render a structure vulnerable to seismic shock, vibrations and thermal-dimensional effects.
Many types of epoxies have a tendency to chalk, i.e., to form a white powdery surface, when exposed to sunlight [132]. Therefore, epoxy should be removed from the surface of a treated stone before it cures.
Mortar is a workable paste which hardens to bind building blocks such as stones, bricks, and concrete masonry units, to fill and seal the irregular gaps between them, spread the weight of them evenly, and sometimes to add decorative colors or patterns to masonry walls. In its broadest sense, mortar includes pitch, asphalt, and soft mud or clay, as those used between mud bricks, as well as cement mortar. The word "mortar" comes from Old French mortier, "builder's mortar, plaster; bowl for mixing." (13c.).[1]
Cement mortar becomes hard when it cures, resulting in a rigid aggregate structure; however, the mortar functions as a weaker component than the building blocks and serves as the sacrificial element in the masonry, because mortar is easier and less expensive to repair than the building blocks. Bricklayers typically make mortars using a mixture of sand, a binder, and water. The most common binder since the early 20th century is Portland cement, but the ancient binder lime mortar is still used in some specialty new construction. Lime, lime mortar, and gypsum in the form of plaster of Paris are used particularly in the repair and repointing of historic buildings and structures, so that the repair materials will be similar in performance and appearance to the original materials. Several types of cement mortars and additives exist.
Ordinary Portland cement mortar, commonly known as OPC mortar or just cement mortar, is created by mixing powdered Ordinary Portland Cement, fine aggregate and water.
It was invented in 1794 by Joseph Aspdin and patented on 18 December 1824, largely as a result of efforts to develop stronger mortars. It was made popular during the late nineteenth century, and had by 1930 became more popular than lime mortar as construction material. The advantages of Portland cement is that it sets hard and quickly, allowing a faster pace of construction. Furthermore, fewer skilled workers are required in building a structure with Portland cement.
As a general rule, however, Portland cement should not be used for the repair or repointing of older buildings built in lime mortar, which require the flexibility, softness and breathability of lime if they are to function correctly.[13][14]
In the United States and other countries, five standard types of mortar (available as dry pre-mixed products) are generally used for both new construction and repair. Strengths of mortar change based on the mix ratio for each type of mortar, which are specified under the ASTM standards. These premixed mortar products are designated by one of the five letters, M, S, N, O, and K. Type M mortar is the strongest, and Type K the weakest.
Polymer cement mortars (PCM) are the materials which are made by partially replacing the cement hydrate binders of conventional cement mortar with polymers. The polymeric admixtures include latexes or emulsions, redispersible polymer powders, water-soluble polymers, liquid thermoset resins and monomers.[16] Although they increase cost of mortars when used as an additive, they enhance properties. Polymer mortar has low permeability that may be detrimental to moisture accumulation when used to repair a traditional brick, block or stone wall. It is mainly designed for repairing concrete structures. The use of recovered plastics in mortars is being researched and is gaining ground.[17] Depolymerizing PET to use as a polymeric binder to enhance mortars is actively being studied.[18][19][20]
Lime Mortar The setting speed can be increased by using impure limestone in the kiln, to form a hydraulic lime that will set on contact with water. Such a lime must be stored as a dry powder. Alternatively, a pozzolanic material such as calcined clay or brick dust may be added to the mortar mix. Addition of a pozzolanic material will make the mortar set reasonably quickly by reaction with the water.
It would be problematic to use Portland cement mortars to repair older buildings originally constructed using lime mortar. Lime mortar is softer than cement mortar, allowing brickwork a certain degree of flexibility to adapt to shifting ground or other changing conditions. Cement mortar is harder and allows little flexibility. The contrast can cause brickwork to crack where the two mortars are present in a single wall.
Lime mortar is considered breathable in that it will allow moisture to freely move through and evaporate from the surface. In old buildings with walls that shift over time, cracks can be found which allow rain water into the structure. The lime mortar allows this moisture to escape through evaporation and keeps the wall dry. Re−pointing or rendering an old wall with cement mortar stops the evaporation and can cause problems associated with moisture behind the cement.
Grout is a dense fluid that hardens to fill gaps or used as reinforcement in existing structures.[1] Grout is generally a mixture of water, cement, and sand, and is employed in pressure grouting, embedding rebar in masonry walls, connecting sections of precast concrete, filling voids, and sealing joints such as those between tiles. Common uses for grout in the household include filling in tiles of shower floors and kitchen tiles. It is often color tinted when it has to be kept visible and sometimes includes fine gravel when being used to fill large spaces (such as the cores of concrete blocks). Unlike other structural pastes such as plaster or joint compound, correctly mixed and applied grout forms a water-resistant seal.
Although both grout and its close relative mortar are applied as a thick suspension and harden over time, grout is distinguished[2] by its low viscosity and lack of lime (added to mortar for pliability); grout is thin so it flows readily into gaps, while mortar is thick enough to support not only its own weight, but also that of masonry placed above it.[1]
Grout varieties include tiling, flooring, resin, nonshrinking, structural, and thixotropic grouts.[3] The use of enhancing admixtures increases the quality of cement-based materials and leads to greater uniformity of hardened properties.[4]
Tiling grout is often used to fill the spaces between tiles or mosaics and to secure tile to its base. Although ungrouted mosaics do exist, most have grout between the tesserae. Tiling grout is also cement-based, and is produced in sanded and unsanded varieties, which affects the strength, size, and appearance of the grout.[5] The sanded variety contains finely ground silica sand; unsanded is finer and produces a smoother final surface. They are often enhanced with polymers and/or latex.[6]
Structural grout is often used in reinforced masonry to fill voids in masonry housing reinforcing steel, securing the steel in place, and bonding it to the masonry.[2] Nonshrinking grout is used beneath metal bearing plates to ensure a consistent bearing surface between the plate and its substrate, which adds stability and allows for higher load transfers.[7]
Portland cement is the most common cementing agent in grout, but thermoset polymer matrix grouts based on thermosets such as urethanes and epoxies are also popular.[8]
Portland cement-based grouts include different varieties depending on the particle size of the ground clinker used to make the cement, with a standard size around 15 microns, microfine from 6–10 microns, and ultrafine below 5 microns. Finer particle sizes let the grout penetrate more deeply into a fissure. Because these grouts depend on the presence of sand for their basic strength, they are often somewhat gritty when finally cured and hardened.
From the different types of grout, a suitable one has to be chosen depending on the load. For example, a load up to 7.5 tons can be expected for a garage access [two-component pavement joint mortar (traffic load)], whereas a cobbled garden path is only designed for a pedestrian load [one-component pavement joint mortar (pedestrian load)]. Furthermore, various substructures determine whether the type of grout should be permanently permeable to water or waterproof, for example, by concrete subfloor.
The mechanisms behind mortar deterioration Erosion is not a brick structure's friend. In Springtime we have dry winds and light rains, followed by Summer with frequent rain and extreme heat. The dampness combined with the heat causes the expansion of brick and the surrounding mortar. Whereas, when Wintertime rolls around, we have very-cold temperatures, and in some Australian locales - freezing temperatures. The cold tends to cause contraction and shrinkage of bricks and mortar - ever so slightly.
Frozen droplets of water between joints actually expand and chip small bits of mortar away (ice takes up more space than water - don't freeze your beers!). This is known as spalling of the mortar.
These expansions and contractions due to weather culminate to show signs of weathering in your structure's mortar over the years and will present as cracked, crumbling or chipped-away sections. If there are sections that have been exposed to prolonged dampness, the mortar may appear discoloured too.
Let us not forget, that rain and wind also carry away small grains of mortar from your structures over the years. Combine these effects with land movement, corrosion from salt in ocean air and its effects on corroding lintels, arch bars and wall ties - it is evident why, although strong and hard wearing, brick structures can not last forever without a little help from masonry experts who are experts in brick repairs and repointing, Sydney.
Structural Consequences Water entering the structure Unfortunately, with deteriorating mortar, comes a reduction in the structure's ability to repel water. Small cracks and holes over time allow the passage of water into and around walls which can collect and sit. If unable to drain away or dry, this can lead to excessive moisture in the building and can develop mould. This then becomes a health risk as mould. spores are highly mobile and harmful when inhaled over prolonged periods of time.
Deterioration in structure The deteriorating mortar, when unable to sustain the load of the bricks above it, begins to crack and crumble. The cracking can lead to pieces of brickwork falling off or requiring removal during remediation work. Some sections may drop out entirely if their support has completely failed - especially around failing lintels.
Uneven Wear and Tear Masonry joints don’t wear evenly. Different parts of a façade are more exposed to the elements, and those with more exposure, typically see water damage setting in sooner - which can lead to the masonry's failure over time. Rest, there is a fix!
Shale is a fine-grained, clastic sedimentary rock formed from mud that is a mix of flakes of clay minerals (hydrous aluminium phyllosilicates, e.g. kaolin, Al2Si2O5(OH)4) and tiny fragments (silt-sized particles) of other minerals, especially quartz and calcite.[1] Shale is characterized by its tendency to split into thin layers (laminae) less than one centimeter in thickness. This property is called fissility.[1] Shale is the most common sedimentary rock.[2]
The term shale is sometimes applied more broadly, as essentially a synonym for mudrock, rather than in the more narrow sense of clay-rich fissile mudrock.[3]
Texture Shale typically exhibits varying degrees of fissility. Because of the parallel orientation of clay mineral flakes in shale, it breaks into thin layers, often splintery and usually parallel to the otherwise indistinguishable bedding planes.[4] Non-fissile rocks of similar composition and particle size (less than 0.0625 mm) are described as mudstones (1/3 to 2/3 silt particles) or claystones (less than 1/3 silt). Rocks with similar particle sizes but with less clay (greater than 2/3 silt) and therefore grittier are siltstones.[4][5]
Shales are typically gray in color and are composed of clay minerals and quartz grains. The addition of variable amounts of minor constituents alters the color of the rock. Red, brown and green colors are indicative of ferric oxide (hematite – reds), iron hydroxide (goethite – browns and limonite – yellow), or micaceous minerals (chlorite, biotite and illite – greens).[4] The color shifts from reddish to greenish as iron in the oxidized (ferric) state is converted to iron in the reduced (ferrous) state.[6] Black shale results from the presence of greater than one percent carbonaceous material and indicates a reducing environment.[4] Pale blue to blue-green shales typically are rich in carbonate minerals.[7]
Clays are the major constituent of shales and other mudrocks. The clay minerals represented are largely kaolinite, montmorillonite and illite. Clay minerals of Late Tertiary mudstones are expandable smectites, whereas in older rocks (especially in mid-to early Paleozoic shales) illites predominate. The transformation of smectite to illite produces silica, sodium, calcium, magnesium, iron and water. These released elements form authigenic quartz, chert, calcite, dolomite, ankerite, hematite and albite, all trace to minor (except quartz) minerals found in shales and other mudrocks.[4] A typical shale is composed of about 58% clay minerals, 28% quartz, 6% feldspar, 5% carbonate minerals, and 2% iron oxides.[8] Most of the quartz is detrital (part of the original sediments that formed the shale) rather than authigenic (crystallized within the shale after deposition).[9]
Shales and other mudrocks contain roughly 95 percent of the organic matter in all sedimentary rocks. However, this amounts to less than one percent by mass in an average shale. Black shales, which form in anoxic conditions, contain reduced free carbon along with ferrous iron (Fe2+) and sulfur (S2−). Amorphous iron sulfide, along with carbon, produce the black coloration.[4] Because amorphous iron sulfide gradually converts to pyrite, which is not an important pigment, young shales may be quite dark from their iron sulfide content, in spite of a modest carbon content (less than 1%), while a black color in an ancient shale indicates a high carbon content.[7]
Most shales are marine in origin,[10] and the groundwater in shale formations is often highly saline. There is evidence that shale acts as a semipermeable medium, allowing water to pass through while retaining dissolved salts.
Formation The fine particles that compose shale can remain suspended in water long after the larger particles of sand have been deposited. As a result, shales are typically deposited in very slow moving water and are often found in lakes and lagoonal deposits, in river deltas, on floodplains and offshore below the wave base.[13] Thick deposits of shale are found near ancient continental margins[13] and foreland basins.[14] Some of the most widespread shale formations were deposited by epicontinental seas. Black shales[8] are common in Cretaceous strata on the margins of the Atlantic Ocean, where they were deposited in fault-bounded silled basins associated with the opening of the Atlantic during the breakup of Pangea. These basins were anoxic, in part because of restricted circulation in the narrow Atlantic, and in part because the very warm Cretaceous seas lacked the circulation of cold bottom water that oxygenates the deep oceans today.[15]
Most clay must be deposited as aggregates and floccules, since the settling rate of individual clay particles is extremely slow.[16] Flocculation is very rapid once the clay encounters highly saline sea water.[17] Whereas individual clay particles are less than 4 microns in size, the clumps of clay particles produced by flocculation vary in size from a few tens of microns to over 700 microns in diameter. The floccules start out water-rich, but much of the water is expelled from the floccules as the clay minerals bind more tightly together over time (a process called syneresis).[18] Clay pelletization by organisms that filter feed is important where flocculation is inhibited. Filter feeders produce an estimated 12 metric tons of clay pellets per square kilometer per year along the U.S. Gulf Coast.[19]
As sediments continue to accumulate, the older, more deeply buried sediments begin to undergo diagenesis. This mostly consists of compaction and lithification of the clay and silt particles.[20][21] Early stages of diagenesis, described as eogenesis, take place at shallow depths (a few tens of meters) and are characterized by bioturbation and mineralogical changes in the sediments, with only slight compaction.[22] Pyrite may be formed in anoxic mud at this stage of diagenesis.[8][23]
Deeper burial is accompanied by mesogenesis, during which most of the compaction and lithification takes place. As the sediments come under increasing pressure from overlying sediments, sediment grains move into more compact arrangements, ductile grains (such as clay mineral grains) are deformed, and pore space is reduced.[24] In addition to this physical compaction, chemical compaction may take place via pressure solution. Points of contact between grains are under the greatest strain, and the strained mineral is more soluble than the rest of the grain. As a result, the contact points are dissolved away, allowing the grains to come into closer contact.[21]
It is during compaction that shale develops its fissility, likely through mechanical compaction of the original open framework of clay particles. The particles become strongly oriented into parallel layers that give the shale its distinctive fabric.[25] Fissility likely develops early in the compaction process, at relatively shallow depth, since fissility does not seem to vary with depth in thick formations.[26] Kaolinite flakes have less tendency to align in parallel layers than other clays, so kaolinite-rich clay is more likely to form nonfissile mudstone than shale. On the other hand, black shales often have very pronounced fissility (paper shales) due to binding of hydrocarbon molecules to the faces of the clay particles, which weakens the binding between particles.[27]
Lithification follows closely on compaction, as increased temperatures at depth hasten deposition of cement that binds the grains together. Pressure solution contributes to cementing, as the mineral dissolved from strained contact points is redeposited in the unstrained pore spaces. The clay minerals may be altered as well. For example, smectite is altered to illite at temperatures of about 55 to 200 °C (130 to 390 °F), releasing water in the process.[8] Other alteration reactions include the alteration of smectite to chlorite and of kaolinite to illite at temperatures between 120 and 150 °C (250 and 300 °F).[8] Because of these reactions, illite composes 80% of Precambrian shales, versus about 25% of young shales.[28]
Unroofing of buried shale is accompanied by telogenesis, the third and final stage of diagenesis.[22] As erosion reduces the depth of burial, renewed exposure to meteoric water produces additional changes to the shale, such as dissolution of some of the cement to produce secondary porosity. Pyrite may be oxidized to produce gypsum.[21]
Black shales are dark, as a result of being especially rich in unoxidized carbon. Common in some Paleozoic and Mesozoic strata, black shales were deposited in anoxic, reducing environments, such as in stagnant water columns.[8] Some black shales contain abundant heavy metals such as molybdenum, uranium, vanadium, and zinc.[8][29][30][31] The enriched values are of controversial origin, having been alternatively attributed to input from hydrothermal fluids during or after sedimentation or to slow accumulation from sea water over long periods of sedimentation.
Wood is effectively decomposed by microbial agents. Above ground, in non-waterlogged environment, wood is mainly degraded by aggressive basidiomycete fungi [1]. Wood degrading fungi and bacteria are specialized to degrade lignocellulosic materials (lignin, cellulose, and hemicelluloses) as a part of the carbon cycle in nature. This process is relatively fast; from a few years to a couple of decades. Oxygen, high humidity, and temperature are the main factors that control the process [1].
Archaeological wood is a term used to describe man-made wooden objects and constructions recovered by archaeologists at historical sites. Since the end of the 19th century archaeologists observed that archaeological wood can be found well preserved in different types of waterlogged environments. From peats, lakes, rivers, sea, and other waterlogged environments, unique historical objects of wood have been excavated, documented, and conserved. One example is the Oseberg Viking ship, which was found embedded in waterlogged clay at a land site excavation in Norway year 1902. Another is the warship Vasa, which was raised in 1961 after 333 years in the brackish and cold waters of the Baltic Sea.
In order to understand more about this very sensitive and “self-destructive” material, chemical analyses were carried out during the 20th century. They showed that the wood suffered from significant loss of hemicelluloses and celluloses; two of the main components [9], [10], [11], [12]. Conclusions were drawn and the main hypothesis among conservators and wood chemists until the 1990s was the general assumption that the wood material was affected by acid hydrolysis during the long-term exposure in a waterlogged environment [13], [14]. Meanwhile, in the field of degradation of plant tissue, biologists studied microbial degradation of wood [1]. With help of light microscopy, fungal attack was successfully identified, but occasionally also atypical decay patterns were reported. These came usually from foundation poles situated in a waterlogged environment. In a few reports from the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s, it was suggested that these peculiar degradation patterns could be a result of bacterial attack on the wood cell wall [15], [16], [17], [18], [19]. It was not until the 1980s, with help of electron microscopy with a much higher resolution than light microscopy, that it was possible to verify that bacterial degradation in fact was the most dominant type of wood degradation taking place in waterlogged terrestrial and aquatic environments [4], [20], [21], [22], [23].
A brief overview of the two most common degraders in waterlogged environments, erosion bacteria and soft rot fungi is given in the following text.
Erosion bacteria Today, we know that the so-called erosion bacteria are the main degraders of archaeological wood found under waterlogged near anaerobic conditions. This is based on results from both experimental laboratory work as well as investigations on degraded archaeological wood from various terrestrial and aquatic sites worldwide [3], [4], [21], [24], [25]. In contrast to other wood degrading fungi and bacteria, erosion bacteria are able to degrade wood under very low oxygen concentrations which include interior parts of solid wood constructions and wood situated in waterlogged soil, sediments, or waters low in oxygen. The bacteria are rod shaped and 2–8 μm in length and 0.5–0.9 μm in diameter (Fig. 2). Invasion starts from the wood surface through rays and pits, from where the bacteria enter the cell lumen of the tracheids. From here, the bacteria attack and erode the wood cell wall and align themselves along the microfibrils. The bacteria convert the cellulose rich secondary cell wall into an amorphous slimy material, whereas the lignin rich middle lamellae remain seemingly unaffected (Fig. 3). As a result, a coherent network of middle lamellae is still intact despite intense decay by erosion bacteria [26]. This inability to degrade the middle lamellae or one might say incomplete decay, is the reason why archaeological wood still remain its form and integrity in wet condition. Water fills out the degraded cell wall inside each fibre and the fragile middle lamellae provide enough physical strength to maintain the integrity of the wood. But if the wood is allowed to dry out, the capillary forces upon drying are so strong that the wood fibres will collapse and disintegrate.
Erosion bacteria decay develops slowly from surface and inwards until all cellulose rich areas in the wood are utilised. In a Viking pole, 1200 years old, this process was found to be still active in the interior parts [26]. This allowed us to suggest that the process may go on for thousands of years. However, the rate of decay is not just dependent on time of burial. In fact, it has been shown that environmental parameters and wood species may play a just as important role for progression of decay [4], [27], [28].
The true identity of the erosion bacteria has been very difficult to clarify despite many efforts during the last twenty year. Isolation and cultivation of single species with traditional methods has failed, which is the case for a majority of bacteria in nature. However, in a recent European Commission funded research project, BACPOLES, it was concluded, with help of DNA technique, that erosion bacteria probably is a wide group different bacteria species, where some isolated species belongs to the group of Flavobacteria and Cytophaga [29]. Other DNA analyses of waterlogged archaeological wood has showed that the wood host a wide spectre of many different bacteria species, but they are most likely secondary bacteria with other tasks than wood degradation [30]. The interaction between bacterial and fungal species inside the wood in situ is most interesting and a matter for future research.
Soft rot fungi Soft rot fungi degrade wood in both terrestrial and aquatic environments and are considered to have lower requirements for oxygen than Basidiomycetes that are active above ground [1]. Soft rot fungi belongs to the group of Ascomycetes and Fungi imperfecti and are named by the appearance of the wood after decay as the surface turns soft [31].
Aquatic soft rot fungi are common wood degraders in seawater and other natural water systems like lakes, rivers and ponds. More than 400 species are known from literature and novel species are frequently observed and described [32], [33]. They degrade wood exposed in the water column at low and high depths and at varying waters temperatures [34]. Some aquatic soft rot fungi are obligate marine which means that they only reproduce and grow in saline waters, whereas other species are obligate fresh water fungi. A large group of aquatic fungi have wide tolerance for both water temperatures and salinities, which means that they can be found in wide diverse environments [35].
Terrestrial soft rot fungi are most active in the upper soil layer where the soil is very wet/humid, or where periodic desiccation provides an environment with varying humidity's. They are therefore most active in the soil/air interface zone, from where a large number of species have been studied, isolated and identified [1]. Especially their attack on standing wooden poles has been carefully evaluated, as they are able to cause great harm at the base, which have let to deadly accidents in connection with inspection of telephone poles.
The terrestrial soft rot decay patterns in wood are well known [36] and seem identical to the decay patterns observed in wood from aquatic environments [37]. Initial infestation takes place from the wood surface where hyphae penetrate the wood through the natural openings like rays and pits, including vessels of hardwoods [1]. Positioned inside the lumen, a local penetration of the massive wood cell wall takes place where the cellulose rich secondary cell wall is target for an advanced enzymatic decay process. Fungal growth spreads to adjacent fibres by hyphal penetration, and in short time a smaller area of the wood is infected.
Soft rot cause two different types of attack, where Type 1 is most common [38]. Glass disease, also referred to as sick glass or glass illness, is a degradation process of glass that can result in weeping, crizzling, spalling, cracking and fragmentation.[1][2] Glass disease is caused by an inherent instability in the chemical composition of the original glass formula.[3] Properties of a particular glass will vary with the type and proportions of silica, alkali and alkaline earth in its composition.[4] Once damage has occurred it is irreversible, but decay processes can be slowed by climate control to regulate surrounding temperature, humidity, and air flow.
Glass disease is caused by an inherent fault in the chemical composition of the original glass formula.[3] Glass contains three types of components: network formers establish basic structure, network stabilizers make glass strong and water resistant, and flux lowers the melting point at which the glass can be formed.[5] Common formulations of glass may include silica (SiO2) as a former, alkali oxides such as soda (Na2O) or potash (K2O) for flux, and alkaline earth oxides such as lime (CaO) for stabilizing.[4][5]
Structurally, glass is composed of a network of SiO4-tetrahedrons. In addition to the network former silicon which establishes its principal structure, glass contains network modifying agents such as the alkali ions Na+ and K+ and the alkali earth ions Ca2+ and Mg2+. Glass does not have a defined stoichiometry, rather the network is flexible. It can incorporate other ions, depending upon factors such as the main composition and firing conditions of the glass.[6] This causes almost all glass to be chemically unstable to some extent.[7]
The likelihood of degradation due to glass disease depends on the amount and proportion of alkaline compounds mixed with silica, and on surrounding conditions.[3] Inadequate calcium oxide causes the alkalis in the glass to remain water-soluble at a low level of humidity. Exposure to higher levels of relative humidity during storage or display causes alkali to hydrate and leach out of the glass. Repeated changes in humidity can be particularly damaging. It is important to realize that any glass object can deteriorate if it is exposed to unsuitable environmental conditions.[9] Crystal, historic glass, or treasured family items should never be exposed to the high temperatures and water pressure of a dishwasher.[10][11]
Energy dispersive x-ray analysis (EDXA),[1][8] scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) can be used to study exchange reactions in different types of glass. By quantifying and studying chemical structure and reactions at the near-surface layer, the mechanisms of glass disease can be better understood.[7] Measurement of the pH of glass surfaces is particularly important if glass objects have a matte surface, or have been exposed to kaolin or other substances. In the case of extremely small objects such as glass beads, pH measurement may be necessary to determine whether alkaline salts are present and changes in the glass are occurring.[9][12]
The processes involved in glass disease can reduce the transparency of the glass or even threaten the integrity of the structure. Glass disease causes a complex disintegration of the glass which can be identified through a variety of symptoms, including weeping, crizzling, spalling, cracking and fragmentation.[3]
The initial stage of glass disease occurs when moisture causes alkali to be leached out of the glass. This becomes apparent when hygroscopic alkali deposits on the glass give it a cloudy or hazy appearance.[7][13] This may occur within as little as five to 10 years of the glass's manufacturing. The glass may feel slippery or slimy[10] and tiny droplets, or weeping, may be seen in high humidity (above 55%).[14] The hydrated alkali can form fine crystals on the surface of the glass in low relative humidity (below 40%).[4]
At this stage, it may be possible to gently wash the glass and remove the surface alkali.[14] This will help to stabilize the glass by reducing the surface pH, and by removing dust, soiling, and hygroscopic components that attract further moisture.[9]
If alkali builds up due to ion exchange, and remains on the surface of the glass, the decay process will accelerate. The presence of sodium or potassium ions in the alkali build up will increase the pH on the surface of the glass, causing it to become basic. This will dissolve silica from the glass as well as releasing more alkali ions.[10][7]
The haziness seen on the glass may not disappear entirely when washed and dried. When examined closely at an angle with a low light, fine cracks like tiny silvery lines or shimmering rays, may be visible.[13] A microscope can confirm the presence of cracks. The cracks are caused by the loss of alkali, which leaves microscopic gaps in the structure of the glass.[14]
As higher amounts of alkali leach from the glass cracks are likely to become deeper. Crizzling is a distinctive network of fine cracks in the glass which is visible to the naked eye.[3][15] In some cases, the crazing can gain a more uniform appearance.[13] However, crizzling may not be uniform due to the creation of micro-climates on the glass.[14]
Distinct cracks may appear on the surface of the glass, and surface material may flake or chip, a process referred to as spalling.[14][13]In the most severe stage of deterioration, the structural integrity of the glass has been lost and the glass may separate into pieces.
In the earliest stage of glass disease, it may be possible to wash the glass to remove the surface alkali. The Corning Museum of Glass recommends washing with tap water (tepid, not hot[18]) and a mild (non-ionic[18]) conservation detergent. This should be followed by rinsing with de-ionized or distilled water, and careful drying to remove moisture. Careful washing can remove surface deposits, restore the appearance of clearness to the glass, and help to slow further deterioration.[19][18] Ethanol has also been suggested for cleaning, particularly for glass beads, depending on the surrounding materials that may be affected.[9]
Once more serious damage has occurred, it cannot be reversed. Climate control of humidity and temperature is a possible intervention. Because crizzling results from the reaction of components of the glass with water vapour, controlling humidity and temperature can slow its occurrence.[3] At the Corning Museum of Glass, items in the collection are kept at stable levels of relative humidity, between 40 and 55 percent.[10] Fans may be used within a case to encourage the movement of air and minimize adsorption of moisture on the glass surface. Deterioration is more likely to occur in areas with restricted air-flow which allow moisture to remain on the glass.[14] Chemical methods for retarding corrosion rates and stabilizing surfaces are being investigated.[4]
When a composite object contains a variety of materials, one of which is sick glass, the considerations involved in conserving and displaying the object become more complicated. For example, the British Museum chose to conserve and display a Siberian shamanic apron made of leather, glass and other materials. They weighed the likelihood that it would decay more quickly if shown against the desirability of making a unique object visible and the inevitability of its eventual degradation. "Its conservation and display ensures that access to this beautiful and unique object is maximized before the pale yellow beads, which are intrinsic to the object, are inevitably lost beyond repair."[1]
Our methods and field techniques have evolved over the last decade, but the principal aspects of wall conservation have remained the same. The first stage of architectural stabilization was to remove as much as possible of the ancient earth mortar from between the wall stones on all exposed facets of the walls. The purpose was to clean the interstices of the wall blocks to a depth of about 10 cm, or as deeply as possible into the wall face, without moving or destabilizing the original position or coursing of the stones (figs. 4-5). While we initially used small-diameter iron rods, ice picks, and small hand picks, to dig out the ancient mortar by hand, we later employed air-pressure pistol-shaped hammers, powered by air compressors, and fitted with a narrow wedge or chisel-shaped head (fig. 6).
Once the ancient mortar was removed, the wall was washed carefully with a hose or sprayer, using the water pressure to clean the surfaces and interstices of the stones (fig. 7). Washing the walls before application of the mortar was critical. The process cleans and reduces the temperature of the surfaces of the wall stones facilitating the adherence, setting, and long-term stability of the compound. The mortar material we used experimentally in 2003 consisted of a mixture of lime, white cement, tephra, and a combination of fine and coarse-grain sand. After observing the condition of the mortar after a year, we noticed that the material adhered well to the masonry, but wider interstices were less stable and some cracks were evident. In 2004 we removed the lime and tephra from the mixture, using principally sand and white cement.
The final stages of wall conservation are equally arduous: this is the application of the mortar, and then the scraping of the interstices (fig. 8). When applied, the mortar compound must be compacted deeply into the spaces between wall stones, normally using one’s fingers at first, and then wooden pegs, hammers and mallets. At this stage the air-compressor pistols were effective; fitted with custom-fashioned hammer-shaped spikes, they could be used to pound the mortar deeply in between the wall stones, with considerable precision (fig. 9). These final stages of the process were perhaps the most important, as the bond between the mortar and stone must create a clean and even seam, sealing the spaces between wall stones completely so that no rain or wind-born soil and vegetation can penetrate the exposed surfaces to take root in the wall. This stage was also time sensitive—the mortars had to be pressed and scraped before setting (fig. 10)—and involved hundreds of hours of scraping down the interstices, further pressing the mortar into place against the stone surfaces. More detailed work, requiring a team of architectural conservators, was necessary to repair fractures in the stepped bench of the Monumental Civic Building (fig. 11). Ancient fissures in the fine sideropetra blocks of the bench had begun to expand, after exposure to the elements in 2005 and 2006. Extreme temperature fluctuations at this elevation—especially alternating freezing and warming trends during the winter months—combined with normal seismic activity, caused or widened multiple fractures within the building, and elsewhere on the site.
Those mosaics on sites that escaped being detached and relaid in past decades have also reached a crisis situation in many countries, if there is anything left of them (Figure 5). Excavations carried out by foreign archaeologists up to a century ago, and now more often by local archaeologists, have left a vast number of mosaics exposed on sites which are beyond the resources and skills of the authorities to protect and maintain. The options faced by the authorities regarding the conservation of mosaics still on their original bedding are much better than if they had been detached and relaid. An in situ mosaic on its original bedding can be protected and conserved for the longterm by reburial, while a mosaic relaid on reinforced cement cannot. The other option for in situ mosaics is to protect and present them under a new shelter construction (see Gionata Rizzi, “Sheltering the mosaics of Piazza Armerina: issues of conservation and preservation” in Heritage, Conservation and Archaeology), however this option is much more expensive. In situ mosaics will not necessarily survive in the long-term in the open air, even if provided with continual maintenance. The artistic and historical value of some mosaics on sites certainly merit protection by shelters and presentation to the public, but the majority of mosaics on sites do not. This does not imply that they should be left exposed until they are either beyond repair or have become a loose pile of tesserae. A recent assessment of mosaic reburials in Tunisia has shown that just a few centimeters of sand placed over a mosaic can prevent significant deterioration of a mosaic.  The deeper the reburial fill covering, the more protective and stable the created environment will be for the mosaic, but with a very limited budget, the slow destruction of mosaics through exposure to the elements can be avoided even with very shallow reburials.    
Weathering is the source of most of the deterioration of archaeological sites. Wind, rain, freeze-thaw, and evaporation are extremely common and can cause erosion. Natural disasters, such as floods, fires, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions, can cause the complete destruction of a site.[5] The most effective way to protect archaeological sites from these larger events is to formulate a risk management plan. Archaeologists and conservators should assess threats to the site and determine material susceptibility.
Climate change Climate projections also show that changes in rainfall (intensity and frequency), increases in temperature and frequency of heatwaves, rising sea levels and groundwater fluctuations, warmer seas and ocean acidification will also result in changes to flora and fauna, ground conditions (on and below the surface) will affect archaeological deposits and structures.[6] Human responses to the climate crisis also impact archaeological sites.
Dry Preservation  Climates or environments that are arid and lack moisture provide perfect conditions for dry preservation. The hot sands of Egypt are perhaps the most common example of this. Dry does not always need to be hot though, as can be seen by the airtight coffin that preserved the Lady of Dai in China.  Without moisture entering the environment, bacteria and microorganisms are not able to flourish and begin their work on decomposing organic material.
Cold Preservation Similar to our own refrigeration system, freezing organic material can essentially keep a moment in time locked away until thawing occurs. The arctic offers a great deal of unlocked archaeological evidence, and has proven to preserve some extraordinary things: the Ötzi man, for example, or the immaculate woolly mammoths pulled from the tundra.  Flesh and skin are so well preserved, that archaeologists can see tattoos, as well as decipher a plethora of vital information regarding daily life.
Wet (Waterlogged) Preservation If wetland archaeology weren’t as expensive as it was, it would probably be one of the most popular forms of excavation as it can preserve the most organic material. Submersion in a lake, bog, swamp, etc. essentially creates an anoxic environment for the artefact. Without oxygen, bacteria cannot grow or feed on the organic material, leaving it essentially untouched until it is uncovered by excavation.  Bog bodies are an example of famous finds in waterlogged environments. Waterlogged archaeological wood is also vital for tree ring dating timelines. The main concern lies with removal from the wet environment as it immediately begins to dry out and degrade. Careful attention must be paid to wet finds and they must be conserved accordingly.
Biodeterioration is a type of damage generated by the growth and/or metabolic activities of organisms on various substrates. As defined by Hueck [1], biodeterioration is “any undesirable change in the properties of a material caused by the vital activities of organisms”, or, as defined by Rose [2], it is “the process by which living organisms are the cause of the [structural] loss of quality and, consequently, of value”. This definition separates the concept of biodeterioration from cases of wear and corrosion involving undesirable changes in the properties of a material caused by mechanical, physical, and chemical influences [3].
Historical buildings and stone monuments are the maximum expression of human heritage and, being subject to deterioration, their conservation has become a matter of concern for the scientific community to ensure the identity and cultural continuity of humanity [4,5].
Therefore, understanding the physiological and morphological characteristics of deteriogenic organisms, such as algae, fungi, lichens, mosses, and vascular plants, is necessary to establish the type of interaction that occurs with the material and to evaluate the cause–effect of the deteriorating action of a specific biological agent [6]. The colonization of stone monuments by an organism also depends on the chemical–physical properties of a material, giving rise to a particular susceptibility to colonization, defined as bioreceptivity, which is based on the surface roughness, porosity, exposure, and inclination of the wall [5,7,8,9]. Obviously, the building materials are more or less bioreceptive and therefore subject in different ways to biological degradation.
Environmental conditions such as moisture, wind, and temperature can play a crucial role in the colonization and establishment of living communities that can affect the stone surfaces of monuments and works of art. As the alteration processes proceed, living organisms begin to colonize the area and so the phenomenon of biodeterioration takes place [10]. Several authors have reported that microorganisms can play a significant role in all rock deterioration processes, developing on the stone surface even when no organic matter is present [11]. Algae and cyanobacteria are usually the first colonizers due to their limited water demands, then lichens follow, which are highly resistant to drying and high temperatures, and fungi, which cause alterations (e.g., stains and loss of cohesion) that are difficult to identify by direct observation [12,13]. With a persistent deteriogenic action of environmental agents and microorganisms, the colonization of buildings by vascular plants is favored and increased.
Deterioration occurs after a strong alteration due to weathering and aging of stone materials. Weathering is a combination of geochemical, geophysical, and biological processes responsible for the alteration of source rocks.
Physically, rock masses are eroded from an overlying rock resulting in fragmentation of the outcrop, aggravated by temperature differences which consequently emphasize the susceptibility to chemical attack [17]. Chemical weathering changes the chemical composition and structure of source rocks, leading to disintegration and in turn increasing the mineral surface area available for chemical weathering [18]. Bioweathering, instead, consists of the alteration of rock-forming minerals by biota (microorganisms, plants, and animals) which produce mechanical forces and metabolic compounds, including chelators and organic acids [17]. Generally, biodeterioration can be classified in three different types: physical or mechanical, aesthetic, and chemical. The physical type is related to the processes of growth and the movement of living organisms which destroy the material structure (e.g., root damage, gnawing by rodents). From an aesthetic point of view, the most significant effects depend on encrustation or soiling due to the presence of organisms, their metabolic products, and/or dead bodies, which form a microbial layer on the surface known as biofilm. Finally, chemical biodeterioration includes two different processes: assimilatory and dissimilatory. In the process of assimilation, organisms use the structural component as a food source by changing the properties of the material, while in the dissimilatory process, organisms excrete waste products or other substances that negatively affect the material [19,20].
As autotrophic organisms, algae and Cyanophyta are typically deemed the first microorganisms to colonize historical artifacts. Their presence is indicated by the deposit of a patina which can cause chemical or mechanical stone degradation [21]. Cyanophyta and other N-fixing organisms along with more complex communities, such as lichens, produce materials that increase the amount of nitrogen and can facilitate the establishment of rootless plants, such as mosses. Thus, in the early stages of colonization where the fixed nitrogen is a limiting nutrient, with the main reserve of nitrogen in the biosphere being molecular di-nitrogen, biological nitrogen fixation is among the first chemical mechanisms related to substrate formation. It consists of the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia by symbiotic, associative, and free-living bacteria [22,23]. Then, microbe and lower plants release secretions which play a pioneering role in soil formation accelerating the process of rock weathering and altering the properties of parent material. A constant secretion production gives rise to a shallow, original soil, which is being enriched by nutrients due to biological growth that limits leaching processes. At the same time, the strong interaction between the non-vascular vegetation and the original soil allows a further accumulation in nutrients available to higher plants, whose activity promotes the production of fertile soil [17,24].
Hence, pioneer microorganisms and plants (both therophyta and hemicryptophyta) are always present in the colonization process and can cause minimal damage, with them being replaced later by more harmful plants such as small shrubs or trees (Figure 1).
Considering this sequence, two colonization modes can be described in relation to exposure, slope, water availability, and other factors that influence the arrival of some organisms over others depending on their adaptation to the present conditions. In the first, there is the intervention of abiotic factors that create the necessary conditions for the development of bacteria, fungi, and lichens. The latter deteriorate the surfaces causing the formation of a substrate suitable for the first pioneer plants (i.e., Sonchus tenerrimus, Parietaria diffusa) which in turn form a favorable substrate for other higher plants through their detritus, atmospheric dust, bird excrement, and human wastes (Figure 2). The second mode of colonization can occur where there are horizontal surfaces and there is good water availability, so the pioneer organisms can be mosses that trap atmospheric dust leading to the formation of substrates necessary for the germination of seeds of vascular plants (Figure 3).
The succession of communities of living organisms growing on stone artifacts generally begins with the development of lichen flora depending on organic contamination caused by moisture and wind on the stone over time [21]. Lichens occupy environments normally hostile to many other forms of life, perhaps due to their resistance to desiccation and extreme temperatures, to longevity, and to their ability to store nutrients from the surrounding environment (Figure 4) [26].
The colonization of stone materials by lichens is favored by the wind, insects, and birds which disperse the spores in the atmosphere which, falling into pores or cavities with water, favors the development of new organisms [13]. According to Garcia-Rowe and Saiz-Jimenez [26], the large-bird excrement provides the organic nitrogen useful to the develop of an ornithocoprophilous flora, which, in the long term, can cause biodeterioration of materials. Indeed, on the cathedral of Salamanca (Spain) there are some species of lichens, such as Ramalina spp., which are characteristic of rainy climates and excrement-rich habitats [26].
The damage caused by lichens is both mechanical and chemical. The first is due especially to the penetration of the hyphae into the substrate, causing loss of cohesion due to the contraction and expansion of the thallus during fluctuations in the water supply. Chemical damage, instead, regards the production of organic carboxylic acids, such as citric, oxalic, lactic, and gluconic acids which favor the chemical processes by which the lichens are able to decompose lithic constituents [13,27].
On the other hand, a bioprotective condition also occurs. For example, in the case of sandstone, the oxalic acid can react with the calcite cement producing calcium oxalate crystals around the lichen hyphae. When the thallus dies, the union of oxalates and organic and mineral matter form a patina which provides good protection to the sandstone against weathering. In agreement with Arino et al. [28], this balance between biodeterioration and bioprotection was observed at the forum of Baelo Claudia, a Roman city located in southern Spain. The flagstones without lichen cover showed higher deterioration than those colonized by lichens thanks to several preventive actions: reduction of the abrasive effect produced by airborne sand particles, reduction of the dissolution effect of water lying on the surface, reduction of temperature changes, etc. [28].
With a sufficient accumulation of soil in the micro-cavities of rocks, the development of mosses and liverworts can begin [21]. Mosses generally prefer wetter climates in which humid environmental conditions and low temperature promote their regeneration and multiplications (Figure 5). Thus, they retain water and abundant nutrients providing favorable environments for microorganism growth, but consequently, the accumulation of moisture promotes the deterioration and weathering processes of building materials [29,30,31].
Focusing on dry climates, most dryland mosses have evolved to require desiccation by losing virtually all liquid water from their shoot tissues [29,32]. According to Jang and Viles [29], the mosses have a buffering effect that may be beneficial to buildings located in drier climates. This result was observed at the churchyard at Chipping Norton where the comparison between bare stone and moss-covered stone showed that the mosses can shield the substrates from lighter periods of rain and moisture. So, for built heritage sites in these climates, the removal of mosses may not be necessary for the health and preservation of the site. Even, additional tests (e.g., Karsten tube tests) illustrated that the impact of removing mosses may be more damaging than leaving them in situ.
Conversely, in wetter climates and in cases with dramatic and invasive growths, different methods are implemented to preserve and control relics: direct methods (mechanical, biological, chemical, and physical) to counter the microorganisms; and indirect methods to confine the microorganisms’ activity, thus eliminating or reducing their nutritional sources [29,30].
Removing mosses therefore implies a dramatic effect on the aesthetics and presentation of a cultural heritage asset because their presence may be beneficial to the appearance of the monuments as a result of a higher authenticity value. This is the case of Dryburgh Abbey where weathering and decay can accrue ‘age value’, marking the passage of time and creating aesthetically pleasing ‘character’, ‘patina’, and ‘ruination’ [29,33].
Stone artifacts are a harsh environment for plant growth and, as underlined by Segal [34], they show ecological characteristics similar to those of rocks in natural environments and can be considered selective anthropic ecosystems [37,38]. The structural and environmental features of walls affect their ability to act as suitable habitats for plant growth. The factors that most influence the capacity of the walls to serve as habitats for higher plants are the size, construction materials, position, and age [38]. The settlement of vascular plants usually occurs in crevices and fractures in the wall, and if left undisturbed, a succession takes place of plants of increasing diversity and size [3,38]. Vascular plant colonization is essentially conditioned by the adaptability of the species and the efficiency of their mode of reproduction. The living organisms mentioned above are the most harmful biodeteriogens, causing cracking and disconnection of materials, leading to considerable problems for stability and safety. From a biophysical point of view, the decay is mainly caused by the roots, as the radial thickening during growth causes higher pressure on the structural parts of the building. The roots develop in fissures or cracks already present in the walls, in water seepage, and in more fragile parts (e.g., mortar between stones) by reducing the adhesion between the stones [13,39]. In addition, soil forms in the cracks creating niches favorable to the accumulation of nutrients and organic substance, which encourage the development of characteristic vegetation of the biogeographic area affected [34,37]. With regard to the biochemical processes, a dualism can be noted between a mechanism of assimilation where the organism obtains nourishment by exploiting the surface of stones and a mechanism of dissimilation in which the production of metabolites by organisms causes chemical reactions on building materials [37,40,41].
The type of damage that occurs on monuments varies in relation to the biological form of the plants or the characteristics of the root system [14]. Plant biological form has been considered by most authors as the main element for assessing the hazard risk [3,35,42,43]. There are different categories of plants, based on their life cycle and the position of the buds: therophytes-T: annual herbs (short life of few months); hemicryptophytes-H: perennial herbs with buds at the soil level; geophytes-G: perennial herbs with underground storage organs; chamaephytes-Ch: woody plants with buds at no more than 25 cm above the soil surface; and phanerophytes-P: trees and shrubs with buds over 25 cm above the soil surface [44]. After classifying the biological form, it is possible to evaluate the hazard of deteriogenic species according to Signorini [42], assigning a numerical index, defined as a hazard index (HI), ranging from 0 (minimal hazard) to 10 (high hazard). It differs for each species and is based on plant life form, invasiveness, vigor, and the size and shape of the root systems. Moreover, if there is visible damage, the risk assessment method proposed by Fitzner and Heinrichs [45] can be followed, which considers the recurrent damaging phenomena due to plant colonization, such as detachments, cracking, and deformation [14,35,37].Generally, the most relevant environmental factors for the growth of an organism are water, temperature, light, and nutrients, because their values are often close to the minimum limit for the survival of the species. This explains why climatic factors play a primary role in biodeterioration processes [39].
Water accumulating in buildings is among the main causes of decay [48]. Its availability is a fundamental parameter which determines the initiation of microbial susceptibility and colonization, biofilm formation, and subsequent biological degradation. Moisture content in building stones is the result of a dynamic equilibrium between the material and the environment, and it is influenced by the movement of water that goes from inside to outside of the masonry and vice versa [49,50]. Water can reach building materials in several ways, from driving rain, capillary water rising from underground, run-off from the roof, and condensation of air humidity. Capillary rise is the main mechanism for water to infiltrate a building material, hence capillary water is very important for the establishment of microorganisms [48,49,51]. Moisture acts as a substrate for the growth of living organisms such as bacteria, fungi, or algae with consequent physical and chemical damage. For these reasons, it is important to find prevention strategies to avoid problems related to humidity, since eliminating the already existing problem is complicated, especially in structures of historical value [48].
Other important factors involved in the deterioration of stones are related to the substrates and construction materials, from a physical (roughness and porosity) and chemical (mineral composition and surface pH) point of view. In this regard, it is useful to mention the concept of biorecectivity proposed by Guillitte [9], considered as “the totality of material properties that contribute to the establishment, anchorage, and development of fauna and/or flora” or as “the aptitude of a material to be colonized by one or several groups of living organisms without necessarily undergoing any biodeterioration”. This concept originates from the term “susceptibility” and involves an ecological correlation between the colonizer and the substrate. Materials with high porosity have a high bioreceptivity index (BI), as more water is retained inducing worsening of the deterioration process [9,52]. Although a standard laboratory protocol for estimating stone biocerectivity and defining its index has not yet been established, Vázquez-Nion et al. [53] proposed a BI for granitic rocks including two components: BIgrowth that quantifies the extent of the biological growth and BIcolour that quantifies the color change undergone by the stone due to the colonization. BI values are adapted to a scale that allows the qualitative classification of lithotypes in a simple and easily comprehensible form.
The control of biodeterioration processes should begin with preventive measures that prevent the formation of favorable conditions for the development of deteriogenic microflora. Referring to Liebig’s law of the minimum (1840), in order to avoid or control a biological attack on a material, the limiting factor could be identified to modify or reduce its values to a level below the limit necessary for growth. It is not necessary that all parameters for the survival of the species are brought below the minimum level, but it is sufficient that at least one of these values is modified to obtain an inhibitory effect on growth [39]. Furthermore, considering that water is one of the most influential factors in the biodeterioration process, the reduction of moisture within the stone material is necessary, by optimizing drainage systems, correcting architectural defects, and applying protective treatments to the stone. Nevertheless, the preventive actions are not always sufficient [10]. Considering building materials, biodeterioration can play a significant role in the life cycle analysis of large infrastructure systems [19]. So, proper knowledge of environmental conditions, building materials, and colonizing organisms enables the development of new technologies and safer and more effective conservations treatments. Over the centuries, biodeterioration has been treated with mechanical procedures, such as sand blasting, air abrasion, steam cleaning, pressure washing, oils, or even wax. However, these physic-mechanical treatments, which interact with the stone, are often not adequate for historical building as they are very aggressive. In recent times, new methods and eco-friendly or low impact procedures are being perfected to reduce the health risks for the individuals involved in restoration, visitors, and the environment. These methods incorporate both cleaning procedures to remove patinas and biocidal treatments to kill colonizing organisms [54,55]. Before using biocides, effective control of water and nutrient availability by and in the material is required; in fact, biocides should only be applied where biodeterioration cannot be controlled and chemical interventions are unavoidable [10]. Generally, to lower the required concentrations of various type of biocides, a first step in the design of more ecologically friendly solutions may be pre-treatment with water-repellent coatings. Moreover, a detailed analysis of the microbial composition colonizing building materials and a species- and site-specific calibration of biocidal strategies is necessary to select the best biocide or coating to use, thus avoiding non-essential compounds and their release into the environment [55,56,57]. A good solution to improve the efficiency of biocide treatments and to avoid the environmental risks associated with their possible toxicity was studied by Zuena et al. [58]. The researchers applied on four different type of stones (brick, mortar, travertine, and Carrara marble) a novel coating charged with an eco-friendly biocide, the zosteric sodium salt, encapsulated into two silica nanocontainers and dispersed into a tetraethoxysilane-based (TEOS) coating also containing TiO2 nanoparticles. This formulation showed hydrophobic and biocide properties, based on the reduction in the capillary water absorption coefficient and the decrease in microorganism adhesion on cell surfaces at non-toxic concentrations, respectively.
Referring to lichens, for foliose and fruticose ones, the mechanical removal of the lichen thalli is performed as they do not adhere strongly to the substrate. For crust-like lichens, instead, the removal of the thallus which penetrates deeply into the stone requires the use of hard brushes and considerable washing with water and detergents.
However, this method causes the dispersion of spores and increased stone loss, so it becomes necessary to employ biocides. The application of these products is performed by spraying, avoiding windy and rainy days, or brushing, preferably on non-friable surfaces. Several authors recommend the use of quaternary ammonia salts applied with a low-pressure spray, choosing the correct concentration in relation to the porosity of the substrate [14].
While damage caused by micro-organisms is often hardly noticeable, damage caused by vascular plants is more visible and severe, depending on the extent of the growth rate and biological form of the plant. Decay is caused by the aerial part, but mainly by the roots, as they deepen into the structure and grow to a large size, causing physical and chemical issues. Roots secrete substances that attack building materials, and in the course of their growth, they open cracks, cause crumbling, and loosen stones and large fragments in the wall [13]. According to Almeida et al. [61], trees and shrubs such as Ailanthus altissima, Capparis spinosa, Clematis vitalba, Ficus carica, Hedera helix, and Rubus ulmifolius are typically more destructive than herbaceous plants such as Mercurialis annua, Parietaria diffusa, and Sonchus tenerrimus. Aesthetically, Hedera helix is very attractive, but creates many difficulties: the fruit is eaten by birds and the seeds germinate in many microsites; if the plant grows as a liana, the weight damages the surfaces; if the plant germinates and grows in the wall, there is additionally the destructive action of the roots. Moreover, the most destructive plants are those with vegetative reproduction, since stolons and rhizomes cause the infesting plants to increase in size and propagate over large areas [13].
During maintenance operations on historic buildings and archaeological sites, cleaning operations must be combined to remove colonizing vegetation, because their frequency or absence influences the type and degree of colonization by the plants.There are many control methods to reduce or avoid the risk of colonization, which depends on the type of plant, the structure of the building, its state of conservation, and its location. For herbaceous plants, the surest method of control with long-term advantages is the total removal of the plants, including their roots, and thereafter filling the cracks so that other seeds do not germinate in them. However, this method has limitations for ligneous plants due to the difficulty of removing the roots, and when the walls are impervious or very high. In this way, more complex methods must be used, including killing the plant with chemicals, or, if the position of the plant in the building permits, removing stones, extirpating the roots, and rebuilding. Chemical herbicides are more efficient than manual weeding, but their application depends on environmental (climate, chemical, and physical properties of materials, etc.) and toxicological aspects (toxicity, volatility, and biodegradability). Obviously, chemicals should not be used indiscriminately in towns as problems of elimination could arise with already polluted air [13].
“Sugaring” or granural disaggregation of marble crystals appears on surface areas directly exposed to rain fall. The rainwater acidified by carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides from the air pollution slowly dissolves the marble. This damage is evident in the effect on the marble crystals, leading to the loss of their cohesion and ultimately in their falling off.
The phenomenon of sulphation occurs in areas of the marble sheltered from the rain water. In the presence of moisture and sulphur dioxide the calcium carbonate, main component of the marble, is transformed into calcium sulphate dehydrate (gypsum). At first fine gypsum crystals are formed and these subsequently change into large gypsum crystals. The fine crystals layer retains the relief of the surface.
Deposits of air pollutants are evident in areas protected from rainwater are airborne atmospheric pollutants and suspended particles such as soot, hydrocarbons, metallic oxides that have altered the colouration of the surfaces. The black crusts are formed from successive deposits of gypsum, recrystallized calcium carbonate and various atmospheric pollutants.
Fractures, cracks and delamination Many architectural members (blocks or elements) are fractured, and subsequently their morphology and geometry have been changed. The type of failure appears either in the form of fractures, cracks or in the form of delamination, which is the splintering – breaking off of large pieces from the surface of the marble. Most of the cracks have been caused by the rusting and swelling of the iron reinforcements, mainly from the Balanos and Orlandos restoration (1890-1937). There are also fractures that are the result of mechanical forces or heat (such as earthquakes, the fire in antiquity, and the explosion of 1687).
Disintegration and flaking are observable on areas of the surface where the marble has less coherence, so that more water penetrates and is retained. This situation is due to many factors, such as the microstructure of the marble (silicate impurities), thermal fatigue of the surface from fire, and the circulation of soluble salts from previously used conservation materials such as the Meyer cement.
Pitting erosion appears in the form of semi-spherical holes either sporadically or in clusters. It is caused by the activity of micro-organisms whose development is favoured by increased humidity. It appears chiefly on the north side of the monuments and it is worse in areas with silicate veining.
In addition to the damage created by the rusting of the iron reinforcements, there are problems resulting from the mortars used in the past treatments to join fragments and to point cracks. Most are based on Sorrel or Meyer cement, which was used extensively on the monuments, including also the statues of the Acropolis, for more than 80 years. It is a white plaster with two basic components, magnesium oxide and magnesium chloride. Today, most of the mortars of this type are flaking or powdering, producing soluble salts and the adjoining marble crumbles Since 1975 when ESMA took over the coordination and supervision of the works the use of Meyer cement on the Acropolis monuments was suspended.
Biodeterioration factors research by microbiologists has revealed the presence of a variety of microbial colonies, consisted of bacteria, algae, fungi and lichens. The biological factor in the physico-chemical damage to the marble has been shown to be significant. Both epilithic and hasmolithic microflora alter the colour of the monuments’ surface, the secretion of erosive compounds from various micro-organisms causes the dissolution of the calcium carbonate and a large part of the microflora exerts micro-pressures resulting in surface decay.


